# Conclusion

I have argued that repression should increase the probability that new rebel groups will join ongoing civil wars. This is so because repression reduces the relative risk of fighting for previously non-violent individuals, creating a pool of individuals willing to join the conflict. Yet because repression also tends to enhance the salience of ethnic identities, due to the fact such identities often form the basis for targeting and emphasizing such identities is often a good strategy for procuring foreign support, these new fighters are not always interested in joining existing groups. Rather, they should form new rebel groups that provide explicit representation to their ethnic group.

Consistent with my expectations in *H1*, I find that decreases in human rights practices are associated with a substantial increase in the probability that a new rebel group will join the conflict in the following year. A change of -1 in the Latent Human Protection Score for a country, roughly the difference between France and Russia in recent years, triples the probability that a new group will emerge. I do not find support for *H2*, which predicted that ethnic diversity would limit the scope in which the repression mechanism should apply. I do find support for *H3*, which tests the implication that new rebel groups emerging through this process should be more likely than others to draw support from a single ethnic group. Rebel groups that join ongoing conflicts are nearly twice as likely as others to have ties to only a single ethnic group.

These results suggest that the government plays a surprisingly large role in shaping rebel movement structure. Existing work on rebel structure tends to focus on the social [@Staniland2014] or economic [@Weinstein2007] context from which rebels emerge, and studies that do consider the role of the government have often found that repression increases cohesion among target groups [@Simmel1955], though the effect may be contingent on internal group dynamics [@McLauchlin2012]. The findings also contribute to the school of thought which suggests that ethnic diversity is not inherently dangerous [@Fearon1996], with ethnic conflict instead being contingent on the treatment of ethnic groups [@Cederman2010]. Similarly, these results suggest that policymakers could limit the emergence of ethnic polarization during conflicts by ensuring the protection of civilian populations.

In other work I show that repression also frequently provokes the realignment of existing rebel factions. Future work should address the question of why, given that repression increases the number of people willing to use violence, do governments elect to use it? It is possible that repression has some hidden benefit that outweighs the cost of additional rebel groups. Elsewhere I show that repression is negatively related to voting, suggesting one possible answers --- governments are essentially accepting an increase in the level of violence by dissidents in exchange for a reduction in the overall size of the dissident movement. Relatedly, while repression increases the number of individuals willing to use violence, it also provokes division among dissidents along ethnic lines. The latter consequence might be sufficiently desirable as part of a divide-and-conquer strategy to justify the former. Finally, the repression puzzle may be a result of incomplete information. It could be the case the repression offers some possibility of total defeat of the dissident movement, and governments accept the risk of inspiring new rebel groups in pursuit of this outcome. In the Arab Spring, for example, Bahrain used repression to quickly put down the opposition movement there. While the tactic backfired in Syria, the possibility of an outcome similar to Bahrain may have made it a worthwhile gamble.
