# Introduction 

Why do some civil wars have multiple rebel groups, while others have only one? Theories of civil war tend to focus on individual-level motives [e.g. @Gurr1970; @Collier2004] or opportunities [e.g. @Fearon2003] for rebellion while giving little attention to the organization of dissent into rebel groups and coalitions. Even the studies which do explicitly consider rebel group formation tend to focus on group attributes such as their relationship with civilians [e.g. @Weinstein2007], and do not consider the structure of the rebel movement that emerges. Yet, the process of organizing rebel groups is not always straightforward. At least two rebel groups are simultaneously active at some point in 44% of civil conflicts.^[Source: @Pettersson2015.] In the Chadian Civil War, for instance, 25 distinct rebel groups appeared over the course of the conflict. Conflicts in Afghanistan in the 1980's, Somalia in the 1990's, Sudan in the 2000's have been similarly complex. The ongoing civil war in Syria is contested by at least two dozen armed groups. Even movements with geographically-concentrated populations and common goals, such as the Arakanese secessionists in Burma, often fragment into multiple rebel groups. Furthermore, the number of groups operating in these conflicts often varies greatly over time. Returning to the Syrian example, the opposition was largely consolidated under the banner of the Free Syrian Army early in the conflict, later splintered into dozens of factions often organized by religion, and now appears to be consolidating again as groups merger or are defeated.

The importance of rebel movement^[Subsequently, I use the term "rebel movement" to refer to the entire set of rebel groups.] structure has been well established, with several studies examining the consequences of having multiple rebel groups. Generally, these works find that the presence of multiple rebel groups is associated with greater levels of conflict severity. Conflicts of this type last longer than dyadic competitions, as the increased number of veto players complicate the negotiation of peaceful settlements [@Cunningham2006; @Cunningham2009; @Akcinaroglu2012], and create the possibility of peace being spoiled by extreme factions [@Stedman1997]. Relatedly, @Cunningham2009 find that the presence of multiple government-rebel dyads decreases the likelihood that a conflict will end with a peace agreement, while increasing the likelihood of rebel victory. @Findley2012 find this effect to be conditional, however, as the fragmentation of weak rebel movements can increase the probability of peaceful settlement. Perhaps related to the dearth of peaceful settlements, both @Atlas1999 and @Zeigler2016  find that civil wars with multiple rebel groups are prone to recurrence, as new episodes of fighting frequently occur between rebel factions that were allied in the previous conflict. Finally, conflicts with multiple dyads feature over 20% more fatalities than dyadic ones.^[Source: my own analysis using data from @Sundberg2008.] In short, conflicts with multiple rebel groups are an unusually severe subset of civil wars.

While prior research has firmly established the importance of understanding why some conflicts have multiple rebel groups while others do not, few existing works have addressed this phenomenon. The studies that do exist in this area tend to focus on a narrow subset of the processes affecting conflict complexity. For example, several recent works explore the splintering of existing rebel groups [e.g. @McLauchlin2012; @Staniland2014]. These studies tend to focus on the internal characteristics of rebel groups, however, and thus have little to say about why entirely new groups might enter a conflict. @Christia2012 adapts realism from international relations theory into a joint explanation of splintering and alliance formation, but she too ignores the mobilization of new groups. I seek to resolve this gap by exploring the formation of new rebel groups during ongoing conflicts.

In brief, I argue that the treatment of civilians during wartime is a crucial determinant of rebel movement structure. Violent repression should lead many civilians to calculate that joining a rebellion is not dramatically riskier than remaining non-violent, increasing the pool of individuals willing to fight. But as repression is often applied on the basis of ethnicity, and ethnic groups often offer a useful basis for organizing defensive measures and attracting external support, repression should also tend to induce greater levels of ethnic identification. Thus, while new individuals are motivated to enter the fighting, they will not necessarily join existing rebel groups as repression sows division among dissidents along ethnic lines. Ultimately, then, the repression of civilians during civil wars should tend to increase the number of rebel groups.

This research makes several contributions to the broader literature on political violence. First, it sheds new light on rebel motives. Debates between advocates of the 'greed' and 'grievance' hypotheses have not been definitively resolved, perhaps in part because the theories have only been tested on civil war onset. By examining a new dimension of civil wars --- the number of rebel groups present --- I find support for the notion that ethnic grievances are a key motive for rebels. Second, it extends recent work which demonstrates that repression can have a lasting influence on ethnic identity and political mobilization [@Lupu2017], as I show that these effects shape the alignment choices of rebels. Third, whereas existing theories of civil war onset struggle to explain the timing of conflict initiation as they tend to emphasize relatively static factors such as mountainous terrain [@Fearon2003], poverty [@Collier2004], or political inequality [@Cederman2010], I identify a more dynamic process that enhances our understanding of when new rebellions are likely to appear. Finally, this work builds on the existing literature that explores the internal dynamics of individual rebel groups [e.g. @Weinstein2007; @McLauchlin2012; @Staniland2014] by exploring the reasons why rebels might form multiple groups.

The findings presented here are also likely to be of interest to policymakers. As noted above, multi-rebel conflicts are among the most severe civil wars. The ability to predict which conflicts will develop this attribute is thus quite valuable for the task of forecasting conflict severity, allowing policymakers to plan accordingly. Further, it suggests a way of preventing conflicts from becoming severe in the first place --- by protecting civilians. If humanitarian motives alone are insufficient to motivate efforts at civilian protection, the relationship between repression and conflict severity offers another justification for international involvement.

In the following section, I review the existing literatures on rebel movement structures and the effects of repression. Next, I articulate a theory of the effect of repression on the internal dynamics of rebel movements. Subsequently, I propose a research design and test my hypotheses on a sample of all civil wars in the period 1946--2015.
